# SolarWinds Network Performance Monitor

## More than you ever wanted to know about your Layer 3

### What is it? 
SolarWinds NPM is probably the ultimate monitoring tool for anyone in your life
who earns their bread with a Cisco certification. Using a combination of SNMP,
WMI, Netflow, and custom sensors that can be deployed on windows hosts on the
network or attached to a span port, NPM gathers metric oodles of network
performance and availability data, and does a pretty decent job of displaying
and alerting on it. 

The system moves well beyond the typical netflow breakdowns and link state
status-lights, with features like wifi heat-maps (generated by measuring signal
strength of your AP's as seen by your other AP's) layer 3 introspection (eg
current OSPF route info etc..) and even a "Quality of Experience" dashboard
designed to compare network performance (handshake latency) against application
performance (first byte latency) to finally give network administrators some
ammunition with which to return fire when the developers and end-users fire
their "the network is slow" salvos.

Kidding aside, the system is on-premise, installs on a windows server and
requires an MS-SQL server for Data-storage. That said, it easily bests the
network monitoring software most enterprise Network engineers and architects
are saddled with. If you're in a windows shop and you just want something that
shows you what's going on network-wise and stays out of the way otherwise, you
could do much worse.

### push, pull, both, or neither?
Both. The system has a dizzying array of ingestion points (you don't have to
use all of them). It polls SNMP, WMI, and custom sensors, and gets pushes from
netflow, and span ports.

### Measurement resolution 
Default polling intervals are generally set to two minutes by default. You can
read more about the polling interval here:
http://www.solarwinds.com/documentation/en/flarehelp/npm/content/orioncoreagorionpollingsettingspollingintervals.htm

Measurements from Netflow data are kept raw for 4 hours before being
summarized. That process is somewhat complex but you can read about it here: 
https://support.solarwinds.com/Success_Center/Netflow_Traffic_Analyzer_(NTA)/NTA_Tables_and_NTA_Summarisation_Explained

And finally chart granularity is dependent on X-axis length. The breakdown is
available here: 
https://support.solarwinds.com/Success_Center/Netflow_Traffic_Analyzer_(NTA)/Granularity_of_data_in_NTA_charts

### Data Storage 
The primary back-end data store is a MS-SQL database.

### Analysis capabilities
The system provides solid UI for analyzing network behavior and maintains a
good pixel-to-information ratio. There are myriad helpful views and although
pie-charts exist, they're kept to a minimum. A Network administrator will have
more than they need to know to decide where to direct their telnet client.

That said, the system is very monolithic (data-export is confined to Excel
placate-your-manager style reporting). You won't be visualizing your NPM data
next to your JMX custom metrics, and you don't have a lot of control over the
actual behavior of the charts (no selectable resolution, no split-y axis, no
logarithmic axis etc..). 

### Notification Capabilities
NPM supports the Notification capablities you'd expect, downstream alert
squashing, Acknowledgements and escalations etc.. You can alert on anything the
system can present, and create alerts using combined criteria. 

Email is supported out of the box but other integrations are more difficult
than normal to pull off given the rigidity of NPM's back-end data store. Check
out the pagerduty integration guide for NPM to get an idea:
https://www.pagerduty.com/docs/guides/solarwinds-integration-guide/

### Integration capabilities
The system is old-school monolithic. 

### Scaling Model
NPM is a single-instance windows server with a SPOF datastore. Microsoft HA
clustering configurations are possible, but horizontal scalability is not. 
