# Part1, Chapter 1
## Why a taxonomy?

Monitoring is a mess, both functionally and idiomatically.

What does it even mean? *Monitoring.* It's probably the single most meaningless
word in the churning sea of Faustian drivel from which the raucous hoards of IT
vendors and marketeers launch their campaigns. And yet it's also an outright
necessity; a requisite piece of literally *every* engineering endeavor. It is
our eyes; the pressure meter on our propane tank. Our only means of
understanding how the things we build are interacting with the world.

I find this confounding in the extreme -- the magnitude of our amorphous
imprecision in describing this discipline. What do you mean when you say
*monitoring*? What do you want to know? Do you want to know that the servers
are up? Do you want to know the maximum of the p95 latencies between your
workers and the Kafka queue? Do you want to know what percentage of the traffic
traversing your transport interface consists of bit-torrent packets? These are
very different problems. Each requires a very different set of tools and
expertise, and yet there's no way to categorically research any of these tools
independently of the others. They all somehow belong to the same category.
Every other engineering discipline in the world endlessly sub-categorizes
itself into oblivion with increasingly incomprehensible (but extremely precise)
jargon, but all of these tools are just "monitoring tools". 

Does that seem right to you?

Somehow monitoring alone defies distinction. Trapped for decades in this
dichotomy between gluttonous vendors whose single product is the final and
ultimate solution to every monitoring problem you've ever heard of on one side,
and a confounding array of open source tools so hyper-focused on their own use
cases that an entire engineering discipline is dedicated to gluing them back
together on the other side. What meaningful distinction can we make between 50
over-priced tools that self-describe as: "the last all-in-one intelligent
monitoring solution you'll ever need"? What sense can we make of 1000 free
tools designed to interoperate without a single common data-interchange format
between them?  

Ignoring for the moment the lofty question of what got us here, much less how
we get ourselves out, itâ€™s time to at least attempt to categorize the
landscape. When Science has a vast and incomprehensible landscape to make sense
of, it creates a taxonomy, and that's what I'm trying to begin here.  I want to
create something like a map for the laymen; a taxonomy that directs the
attention of the overwhelmed engineer who is just looking for some visibility
toward the subset of tools that are likely to work for her problem domain in
her corporate culture.

We even have a pretty great place to start. For a few years now James Turnbull
has publicly solicited comments from the monitoring-adept end-users of
commercial and open-source monitoring tools. His findings are public domain,
and impartially collected in a vendor-neutral way. 
